



Assailed in this Petition I  for review on certiorari (Petition) is the 
        Decision2  dated November 29, 2016 and the Resolution3  dated June 23, 
        2017 of the  Court of Appeals  (CA)  in  CA-G.R.  SP No. 05935  which



reversed the Decision4  dated March 24, 2010 and the Resolution5  dated 
        March 31, 2011  of the Office of the President (OP) in OP Case No. 08-

        E-190. 


                               Antecedents 


            Deogracias Janeo (Deogracias) was declared a farmer-beneficiary 
        of a 2.5-hectare land situated in  San Vicente, Leganes, Iloilo and was 
       issued Certificate of Land Transfer (CLT) No. 077984. He died on May 15, 1976,6 leaving as heirs his nine children, namely: Ladeslao Janeo7 (Ladeslao ), Marietta J. Quiros8 (Marietta), Merlita Janeo Ramos (petitioner Merlita), Mercedita J. Ramos9 (Mercedita), Reynaldo Janeo (Reynaldo), Ricardo Janeo (Ricardo), Melita J. Jagunap (Melita), Emelita Janeo Sol (respondent Emelita), and Marjorita J. Baltazar10 (Marjorita).11 










            After  Deogracias'  death,  respondent  Emelita  was  left  with  the 
       cultivation of the land and assumed the duties and responsibilities of her father. She then filed before the Department of Agrarian Reform Regional Office (DARRO), Region VI, Iloilo City, an application for confirmation and designation as Deogracias' successor, the cancellation of CLT No. 077984, and the issuance of a new CLT in her favor. 12 







            In an Investigation Report dated January 8,  1987, David Grande, 
        Agrarian Reform  Technologist  of Leganes,  Iloilo,  brought  respondent 

       Emelita's  application  to  the  attention  of the  San  Vicente  Samahang 
       Nayon. The Samahang Nayon issued Resolution No. 6, Series of 1986, recommending respondent Emelita, petitioner Merlita, and Marjorita as priority successors of Deogracias. 13



In  an  Order14  dated  June  10,  1987,  the  Regional  Director 
        confirmed the selection of respondent Emelita, and thus, designated her as the sole owner-cultivator of the subject land. The same Order also canceled the CLT previously issued to Deogracias and issued a new one in respondent Emelita's favor.15 






             Ricardo  filed  a  motion  for  reconsideration  assailing  respondent 
        Emelita's designation as the successor of their father.16 


                                       s 
                           DAR Secretary  Ruling 

             In an Order17 dated July 11, 1988, Department of Agrarian Reform 

        (DAR)  Secretary  Philip  Ella  Juico  (DAR  Secretary  Juico)  denied 
        Ricardo's motion for reconsideration and directed the issuance of a new CLT in respondent Emelita's name.18 He found that majority of the heirs-namely: Marietta, petitioner Merlita, Mercedita, Melita, and Marjorita-had waived their rights and interests over the subject land in 




        favor of respondent Emelita as  evidenced by a Waiver of Rights dated 
        November 26,  1986.19  Respondent Emelita was directed to compensate 
        the  other  heirs  to  the  extent  of their  respective  legal  interest  in  the 

        subject  land,  subject  to  the  payment  of  Deogracias'  outstanding 
        obligations.20 


             Respondent  Emelita's  siblings:  petlt10ner  Merlita,  Ladeslao, 
        Reynaldo, and Melita, filed a motion for reconsideration/reinvestigation of the Order dated July 11, 1988 alleging that fraud attended the execution of the alleged Waiver of Rights in favor of respondent Emelita.21



In  the  meantime,  Emancipation  Patent  (EP)  No.  A-119356  was 
        issued  in  favor  of respondent Emelita,  and  pursuant thereto,  Transfer 

        Certificate of Title (TCT) No.  EP-5840 was issued in her name by the 
        Registry of Deeds of Iloilo.22 


             In an Order23 dated April 3,  1989, DAR Secretary Juico set aside 
        his  Order  dated  July  11,  1988  and  directed  the  remand  of the  entire 
        records of the case to the Regional Director, DARRO VI, Iloilo City, for further investigation. 




             In an Order24  dated May 31,  1996, the Regional Director directed 
        the  issuance  of an  EP  in  favor  of petitioner Merlita  as  the  sole  heir 
        cultivator of the  subject land.  He  found  that there  was  no  unanimous 
        waiver made by the heirs of Deogracias in favor of respondent Emelita.25 In view of the absence of a validly executed unanimous waiver of rights, 


        the  Regional  Director  declared  that  the  order of priority  of the  heir 
        successor should be determined based on their age pursuant to paragraph 2(b) of Memorandum Circular No. 19, Series of 197826 (MC 19, s. 1978); hence, the order of priority would be the eldest, Ladislao,



followed by Marietta and petitioner Merlita.27  Considering that Ladeslao 
       was already cultivating 3 hectares under leasehold tenancy and Marietta was already a CLT beneficiary, the Regional Director designated petitioner Merlita, who had not cultivated any landholding28 and was chosen by majority of the heirs to be the successor of the subject land.29 






            Respondent Emelita,  Marietta,  and Reynaldo,  filed a motion for 
       reconsideration which the Regional Director denied in an Order30  dated 

       December 4, 1996. They filed their appeal before the DAR Secretary, but the latter denied it in his Order31 dated December 10, 1997; it found that the right to succeed was clearly established in favor of petitioner Merli ta. The DAR Secretary denied their motion for reconsideration in a 




       Resolution32  dated April 14, 2008. 


            Subsequently, respondent Emelita, Marietta, and Reynaldo filed a 
       Petition for Review33 before the OP. 


                               OPs Ruling 

            In a Decision34 dated March 24, 2010, the OP denied their Petition 

       for Review. It found that the determination of the validity of the Waiver of Rights allegedly executed by the heirs in favor of respondent Emelita, while admittedly a legal issue, was within the competence of the DAR.35 Thus, it ruled that necessarily, the issue on the validity of such Waiver of Rights should be resolved first before the issue as to who among the heirs of Deogracias should be declared the rightful successor to the 






       subject land.36



The OP also ruled that the Waiver of Rights in favor of respondent 
       Emelita did not reflect the true will  and choice  of the heirs  as  it was 

        attended  with  fraud.  It  noted  that  both  petitioner  Merlita  and  Melita 
        negated  their  signatures  in  the  alleged  document;  that  Ladeslao, 
       Reynaldo, and Ricardo did not sign the Waiver of Rights;  and that the 
        Waiver of Rights  in  favor of petitioner Merlita was attested to  by the 

       majority of the heirs.37 


            The OP further ruled that even on the assumption that the heirs 
        were not able to agree as to who shall be the successor, petitioner Merlita would still be preferred to succeed by reason of age as the eldest among 

       the siblings, who had not cultivated any landholding. The OP noted that the two siblings older than petitioner Merlita already have their 


       respective landholdings and that she is older than respondent Emelita.38 


            Respondent Emelita, Marietta,  and Reynaldo,  filed  their Motion 
        for Reconsideration,39 but the OP denied it in a Resolution40 dated March 
        31, 2011. 



            Not  satisfied,  respondent  Emelita  filed  a  Petition  for  Review41 
        under Rule  43  of the Rules of Court assailing the OP's Decision and 
       Resolution with the CA.42



s 
                                CA  Ruling 

             In the Decision43  dated November 29, 2016, the CA ruled in favor 
        of respondent Emelita. The dispositive portion reads: 



                  WHEREFORE, the  petition  is  GRANTED.  The  Resolutions 
             dated  March  24,  2010, and  March  31, 2011,  of the  Office  of the 
             President, in  O.P.  Case No.  08-E-190, as  well  as  the  Order dated 
             December  10,  1997, and  Resolution  dated  April  14,  2008, of the 
             Department of Agrarian Reform in Adm. Case No. 02-17-88-88-134 [sic], are hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE. No emancipation patent shall be issued in the name of Merlita Janeo Ramos. TCT No. 


             EP-5840 in the name of Emelita Janeo Sol remains valid.44 


             The CA ruled that the DAR Secretary has no authority to order the 
        issuance  of a  new  EP  in  favor  of petitioner  Merlita  over  the  same 

        property covered by EP No. A-119356 and TCT No. EP-5840 issued in favor of respondent Emelita.45 It held that the registration of an EP and 

        the  issuance  of the  c01Tesponding  TCT  by  the  Registry  of Deeds  in 
        respondent Emelita's favor divested the DAR Secretary of administrative authority to summarily cancel that EP.46 According to the CA, it is only when an EP or a CLT is not yet registered with the Land Registration Authority (LRA), or now the Register of Deeds, that the DAR Secretary retains authority to cancel them in the exercise of his administrative functions.47 









             The  CA  held  that  it  is  the  Department  of Agrarian  Reform 
        Adjudication Board (DARAB) that has exclusive original jurisdiction in cases involving the issuance, correction, and cancellation of EPs that are registered with the LRA. It noted that the cancellation of EPs requires the exercise by the DAR of its quasi-judicial power through its 




        adjudicating arm, the DARAB.48



The  CA  also  held  that  the  assailed  Resolutions  of the  DAR 
       Secretary ordering the issuance of an EP in favor of petitioner Merlita, which will thereby result in the cancellation of EP No. A-119356 and TCT No. EP-5840 in the name of respondent Emelita, is void for want of jurisdiction. It added that the assailed rulings cannot be the source of any right nor the creator of any obligation and can never become final, and that any writ of execution based on it is void.49 









            The CA further held that respondent Emelita's title cannot be the 
        subject of a collateral attack. It noted that the outright effect of issuing a patent in petitioner Merlita's favor was the cancellation of respondent Emelita's EP, which is an indirect attack on her registered TCT.50 




            Petitioner Merlita filed her Motion for Reconsideration,51 but the 

        CA denied it in a Resolution52dated June 23, 2017. 


                              Present Petition 


            Petitioner Merlita is  now before the  Court alleging that the  CA 
        committed a grave and reversible error: 


                 x  x  x  IN  HOLDING  THAT  THE  SECRETARY  OF  THE 
             DEPARTMENT   OF  AGRARIAN    REFORM   HAS   NO 
            JURISDICTION OVER THE CASE. 

                 x  x  x  IN  HOLDING  THAT  THE  SECRETARY  OF  THE 
            DEPARTMENT    OF  AGRARIAN    REFORM   HAS   NO 
             JURISDICTION OVER THE CASE IN RESOLVING THE ISSUE INVOLVING THE VALIDITY OF THE WAIVER. 


                 x  x  x  IN  HOLDING  THAT  THE  SECRETARY  OF  THE 
             DEPARTMENT     OF  AGRARIAN  REFORM   HAS   NO 
             JURISDICTION  TO  EXERCISE  CONTINUING  JURISDICTION



Petitioner  Merlita  argues  that  the  DARAB  Rules  of Procedure 
       took effect only on December 26, 1988,54  and thus, not applicable to the 

       instant case which started on August 17, 1988 when she and her siblings 
       filed  a  motion  for  reconsideration/reinvestigation  of the  Order  of the 
       DAR Regional  Director  designating  respondent  Emelita  as  their  late 
       father's substitute farmer-beneficiary. She further argues that at the time of the filing of their motion for reconsideration/reinvestigation, the only prevailing law is Republic Act No. (RA) 6657 or the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law (CARL), which took effect on June 10, 1988.55 Citing Section 50 of the CARL, petitioner contends that it is the DAR, not the DARAB, that has jurisdiction over the case.56 









            Petitioner  Merlita  further  argues  that  the  determination  by  the 
       DAR   regarding  the  validity  of  the  Waiver  of  Rights  in  favor  of 
       respondent Emelita and the determination of the rightful successor to the subject land originally awarded to Deogracias are within the competence of the DAR; and that it has jurisdiction to exercise continuing 



       jurisdiction on the case as provided under Section 1, Rule XVII57  of the 
       DARAB Revised Rules of Procedure which took effect on December 26, 
       1988.58 


            Finally, petitioner Merlita insists that she is entitled to the subject 
       land awarded to their father under MC 19, s.  1978.59 



                          Respondents Comment 


            In  her  Comment,60  respondent  Emelita  argues  that  the  CA's 
       Decision dated November 29, 2016 was simply anchored on the rule that a certificate of title shall not be subject to a collateral attack; thus, it



cannot be altered, modified, or canceled, except in a direct proceeding in accordance with law.61 She also contends that the CA correctly ruled that the matter brought before the DAR Secretary does not directly seek to 



        annul her title but only her qualification to succeed as an allocatee to her deceased father's landholding.62 She further contends that the Regional Director and the DAR Secretary have no jurisdiction to rule on the validity of the title indirectly through the issuance of a new EP in favor of another person because it is a collateral attack on her title;63 and that 





        the DAR Secretary has no authority to order the issuance of an EP over an agricultural land already covered by a TCT as this authority exclusively belongs to the DARAB.64 





                             Petitioners Reply 


             In  her  Reply,65  petitioner  Merlita  asserts  that  there  was  no 
        collateral attack on the title considering that at the time of the issuance of the new EP, the title issued was just an administrative title;66 that the mere issuance of an EP did not put the ownership of an agrarian reform beneficiary beyond attack and scrutiny; and that EPs may be canceled 




        for violation of agrarian laws, rules, and regulations.67 


                                  Issues 


             The pivotal issues for resolution are: (1) whether the CA erred in 
        finding that the DAR Secretary has no jurisdiction to order the issuance of a new EP in favor of petitioner Merlita, and (2) whether there is a collateral attack on respondent Emelita's TCT. 





                                Our Ruling 


             The Court grants the Petition.



The  identification  and  selection  of 
        agrarzan  reform   beneficiaries 

        involve    the    administrative 
        implementation     of      the 
        Comprehensive  Agrarian  Reform 
        Program,  which  zs  within  the 

        exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the 
        Department ofA grarian Reform. 


             Executive Order No. (EO)  229,68  signed on July 22,  1987, vests 
        on the DAR quasi-judicial powers to determine and adjudicate agrarian reform matters, and exclusive original jurisdiction over all matters involving the implementation of agrarian reform, except those falling under the exclusive original jurisdiction of the DENR and the DA.69 






             The  DAR's  jurisdiction  is  both  executive  and  judicial.  Its 
        executive function pertains to the enforcement and administration of the laws, carrying them into practical operation and enforcing their due observance, while its judicial function involves the determination of the 



        rights and obligations of the parties. 70 


             EO No.  129-A,71  issued on July 26,  1987,  created the DARAB, 
        which  assumed  the  DAR's  quasi-judicial  powers  and  functions  with 
        respect to the adjudication of agrarian reform cases.72



Thereafter,  the  CARL was  enacted and took effect on June  15, 
        1988. Section 50 of the CARL provides: 


            SECTION 50.  Quasi-Judicial Powers of the DAR.  - The DAR is 
            hereby vested with primary jurisdiction to  dete1mine and adjudicate 
            agrarian reform matters and shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over all matters involving the implementation of agrarian reform except those falling under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Department of Agriculture (DA) and the Depaiiment of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). 






            Notably,  the DARAB  was created prior to the  enactment of the 
       CARL. Thus, there is no merit to petitioner Merlita's claim that when she and her siblings filed their motion for reconsideration/reinvestigation 


       with the DAR on August 17, 1988, DARAB was not yet in existence, as it was already so as early as 1987. 



            Nonetheless,  the  Court  agrees  with  petitioner  Merlita  that  the 
       present controversy falls within the DAR Secretary's jurisdiction. 
            On  December 26,  1988,  the  DARAB  promulgated  its  Rules  of 

       Procedure which took effect on February 6,  1989 (1989 DARAB Rules). 
       Section  1,  Rule  II  of  the  1989  DARAB  Rules  provides  for  the 
       jurisdiction of the DARAB, the pertinent provision of which states: 


                 SECTION  1.  Primary  and  Original  and  Appellate 
            Jurisdiction. - The Agrarian Reform Adjudication Board shall have 
            primary jurisdiction,  both original  and  appellate, to  determine  and 
            adjudicate all agrarian disputes, cases, controversies, and matters or incidents involving the implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program under Republic Act No. 6657, Executive Order Nos. 229, 228 and 129-A, Republic Act No. 3844 as amended by Republic Act No. 6389, Presidential Decree No. 27 and other agrarian laws and their implementing rules and regulations. 







                 Specifically, such jurisdiction shall include but not be limited 
            to cases involving the following: 


                 xxxx 

                 f) Cases involving the issuance of Certificate of Land Transfer 
            (CLT),  Certificate  of  Land-ownership  Award  (CLOA),  and 
            Emancipation Patent (EP) and the administrative correction thereof;



xxxx 


                  Provided,  howeve,~  that  matters  involving  strictly  the 
             administrative implementation of the  CARP and agrarian laws and 
             regulations, shall be the exclusive prerogative of and cognizable by the Secretary oft he DAR. (Emphasis supplied) 



             On  May  30,  1994,  the  DARAB  issued  the  New  Rules  of 
        Procedure which took effect on June  22,  1994 (1994 DARAB  Rules). 

        Section 1, Rule II of the 1994 DARAB Rules provides: 


                  SECTION 1.  Primary and Exclusive  Original and Appellate 
             Jurisdiction. The Board shall have primary and exclusive jurisdiction, both original and appellate, to determine and adjudicate all agrarian disputes involving the implementation of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP) under Republic Act No. 6657, Executive Order Nos. 228, 229, and 129-A, Republic Act No. 3844 as amended by Republic Act No. 6389, Presidential Decree No. 27 and other 





             agrarian  laws  and  their  implementing  rules  and  regulations. 
             Specifically, such jurisdiction shall include but not be limited to cases involving the following: 


                  xxxx 


                  f)   Those  involving  the  issuance,  correction,  and 
             cancellation of Certificates of Land Ownership Award (CLOAs) and Emancipation Patents (EPs) which are registered with the Land Registration Authority; 



                  g)   XX X 

                  xxxx 

                  Matters involving strictly the administrative implementation of 
             Republic  Act  No.  6657,  otherwise  known  as  the  Comprehensive 
             Agrarian Re.form Law (CARL)  of 1988, and other agrarian laws as 

             enunciated by pertinent rules shall be the exclusive prerogative ofa nd cognizable by the Secretary oft he DAR. (Emphasis supplied) 



             Based on the  foregoing  DARAB Rules,  the DARAB  shall  have 
        primary  and  exclusive  jurisdiction,  both  original  and  appellate,  to 
        determine  and  adjudicate  all  agrarian  disputes  involving  the 

        implementation  of the  CARP  under  the  CARL,  which  includes  the



issuance, correction, and cancellation of Certificates of Land Ownership Awards (CLOAs) and EPs registered with the LRA (now the Register of Deeds). 






            In Sutton v.  Lim, 73  the Court elucidated on the jurisdiction of the 
        DARAB under Section l(f) of the 1994 DARAB Rules as follows: 


                 While the DARAB may entertain petitions for cancellation of 
             CLOAs, as in this case, its jurisdiction is, however, confined only to agrarian disputes. As explained in the case of Heirs of Dela Cruz v. Heirs of Cruz and reiterated in the recent case of Bagongahasa v. Spouses Cesar Caguin, for the DARAB to acquire jurisdiction, the controversy must relate to an agrarian dispute between the landowners and tenants in whose favor CLOAs have been issued by the DAR Secretary, to wit: 







                      The Court agrees with the petitioners' contention 

                 that, under Section 2(f), Rule II of the DARAB Rules of Procedure, the DARAB has jurisdiction over cases involving the issuance, conection and cancellation of CLOAs which were registered with the LRA. However, for the DARAB to have jurisdiction in such cases, they must relate to an agrarian dispute between landowner and tenants to whom CLOAs have been issued by the DAR Secretary. The cases involving the issuance, conection and cancellation of the CLOAs by the DAR in the administrative implementation of agrarian reform laws, rules and regulations to parties who are not agricultural tenants or lessees are within the jurisdiction of the DAR and not the DARAB. 














                 Thus,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  controversy  involves  the 
             cancellation of a CLOA already registered with the Land Registration Authority. What is of primordial consideration is the existence of an agrarian dispute between the parties. 



                 As  defined  in  Section  3(d)  of R.A.  No.  6657,  an  agrarian 
             dispute relates to "any controversy relating to tenurial arrangements, whether leasehold, tenancy, stewardship, or otherwise, over lands devoted to agriculture, including disputes concerning farmworkers' associations or representation of persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing, or seeking to arrange terms or conditions of such tenurial arrangements. It includes any controversy relating to compensation of lands acquired under the said Act and other terms



and  conditions  of  transfer  of  ownership  from  landowners  to 
            fa1mworkers, tenants and other agrarian reform beneficiaries, whether the disputants stand in the proximate relation of farm operator and beneficiary, landowner and tenant, or lessor and lessee." 




                 Based on the above-cited provision, however, petitioner posits 
            that  an  agrarian  dispute  can  be  dissected  into  purely  tenurial 
            (paragraph  1  of  Section  3 [d ])  and  non-tenurial  arrangements 
            (paragraph 2, Section 3 [d ]). This theory deserves no credence. 

                 Verily, an agrarian dispute must be a controversy relating to a 
            tenurial  arrangement  over  lands  devoted  to  agriculture.  Tenurial 

            arrangements pertain to agreements which set out the rights between a landowner and a tenant, lessee, farm worker or other agrarian reform beneficiary involving agricultural land. Traditionally, tenurial aiTangements are in the fonn of tenancy or leasehold arrangements. However, other forms such as a joint production agreement to effect the implementation of CARP have been recognized as a valid tenurial arrangement. 







                 Accordingly,  paragraph  2  of  Section  3(d),  by  its  explicit 
            reference  to  controversies  between  landowners  and  farmworkers, 
            tenants and  other agrarian reform  beneficiaries  with respect to  the 
            compensation of lands acquired under R.A. No. 6657 or other terms and conditions relating to the transfer of such lands, undoubtedly implies the existence of a tenurial arrangement. Also, the phrase "whether the disputants stand in the proximate relation of farm operator and beneficiary, landowner and tenant, or lessor and lessee" in paragraph 2 lists certain forms of tenurial arrangements consistent with the phrase "whether leasehold, tenancy or stewardship, or otherwise" stated in paragraph 1 of the same section. 









                 Moreover, it is a rule in statutory construction that every part 
            of the  statute  must  be  interpreted  with  reference  to  the  context 
            particularly, that every part of the statute must be interpreted together with the other parts, and kept subservient to the general intent of the whole enactment. Therefore, in line with the purpose of recognizing the right of farmers, farmworkers and landowners under the agrarian reform program, both paragraphs 1 and 2 of Section 3(d) of R.A. No. 6657 should be understood within the context of tenurial arrangements, else the intent of the law be subverted. 








                 To  be  sure,  the  tenurial,  leasehold,  or  agrarian  relations 
            referred to may be established with the concurrence of the following: 1) the parties are the landowner and the tenant or agricultural lessee; 2) the subject matter of the relationship is an agricultural land; 3) there is consent between the parties to the relationship; 4) the purpose of the agricultural relationship is to bring about agricultural



production; 5) there is personal cultivation on the part of the tenant or agricultural lessee; and 6) the harvest is shared between the landowner and the tenant or agricultural lessee. 




                 In this case, a punctilious examination reveals that petitioner's 
            allegations  are  solely  hinged  on  the  erroneous  grant  by  the  DAR 
            Secretary  of CLOA No.  00122354  to  private  respondents  on  the 
            grounds that she is the lawful owner and possessor of the subject lot and that it is exempt from the CARP coverage. In this regard, petitioner has not alleged any tenurial arrangement between the parties, negating the existence of any agrarian dispute and consequently, the jurisdiction of the DARAB. Indisputably, the controversy between the parties is not agrarian in nature and merely involves the administrative implementation of the agrarian reform program which is cognizable by the DAR Secretary. Section 1, Rule II of the 1994 DARAB Rules of Procedure clearly provides that "matters involving strictly the administrative implementation of R.A. No. 6657, and other agrarian refonn laws and pertinent rules, shall be 










            the exclusive prerogative of and cognizable by the DAR Secretary."74 

            (Emphasis and citations omitted) 


            Evidently,  in  order  for  the  DARAB  to  have jurisdiction over a 
       case, there must exist an agrarian dispute between the parties.  To recall, 
       an "agrarian dispute" is defined under the CARL as follows: 


           SECTION 3. Definitions.- xx x 

              xxxx 
              d.  Agrarian Dispute refers to any controversy relating to tenurial 
              arrangements,  whether  leasehold,  tenancy,  stewardship  or 
              otherwise, over lands  devoted to  agriculture,  including disputes 
              concerning farmworkers' associations or representation of persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing, or seeking to arrange 

              terms or conditions of such tenurial arrangements. 


              It  includes  any  controversy  relating  to  compensation  of lands 
              acquired under this Act and other terms and conditions of tran~fer of ownership from landowners to .farmworkers, tenants and other agrarian re.form beneficiaries, whether the disputants stand in the proximate relation of farm operator and beneficiary, landowner and tenant, or lessor and lessee. (Emphasis supplied)



It  must  be  stressed  that  an  agrarian  dispute  refers  to  any 
        controversy relating to a tenurial arrangement-an agreement which sets 

        out "the rights between a landowner and a tenant, lessee, farm worker or 
        other agrarian reform beneficiary involving agricultural land."75 


            In the instant case, petitioner Merlita and respondent Emelita are 
        the heirs of Deogracias, the deceased original farmer-beneficiary of the 
        subject land. Evidently, the case is not an agrarian dispute as the suit had no relation whatsoever to a tenurial arrangement between a landowner 


        and his or her tenant, lessee or farm worker. 


            In Lercana v.  Jalandoni, 76  the Court held that "the identification 
        and selection of CARP beneficiaries are matters involving strictly the 
        administrative  implementation  of the  CARP,"  which  is  exclusively 

        cognizable  by  the  DAR Secretary  and  beyond the jurisdiction of the 
        DARAB.77In  the  same  vein,  disputes  between  heirs  of  CARP 
        beneficiaries  as  to  who  among  them  should  be  designated  as  the 
        successor  CARP  beneficiary,  such  as  the  instant  case,  is  exclusively 

        cognizable by the DAR Secretary. 


            Here, the DAR Secretary affinned the Regional Director's Order 
        invalidating  the  Waiver  of Rights  in  favor  of  respondent  Emelita, 
        designating petitioner Merlita as the sole heir-cultivator of the subject 
        land based on MC  19,  s.  1978, and directing the issuance of an EP in 

        petitioner Merlita's favor.78 The DAR Secretary's action was done in the 
        exercise  of his  administrative  powers  and  pursuant  to  his  duty  to 
        implement agrarian reform laws, rules, and regulations. 


            To stress, Section 1, Rule II of the 1994 DARAB Rules provides 
        that matters involving strictly the administrative implementation of the 

        CARL and other agrarian reform laws and pertinent rules shall  be the 
        exclusive  prerogative  of  and  cognizable  by  the  DAR  Secretary. 79 
        Therefore,  the  CA  erred  in  finding  that  the  DAR  Secretary  has  no 
       jurisdiction over the instant case.



The assailed Resolutions of the DAR 
        Secretary  ordering  the  issuance  of 

        an EP in favor ofp etitioner Merlita do not amount to a collateral attack on TCT No. EP-5840 in the name of respondent Emelita. 






             The Court also finds that the CA erred in ruling that the Certificate 

        of  Title  issued  in  respondent  Emelita's  name  has  become 
        incontrovertible and indefeasible, and can no longer be altered, canceled or modified, or subjected to any collateral attack after the expiration of one year from the date of entry of the decree of registration, pursuant to Section 32 of Presidential Decree No. 1529.80 






             Indeed,  a  certificate  of  title  issued  under  an  administrative 
        proceeding  is  as  indefeasible  as  a  certificate  of title  issued  under  a 
        judicial  registration  proceeding,  and  thus  cannot  be  collaterally 
        attacked. 81  However, herein petitioner Merli ta is questioning respondent 

        Emelita's  title- her  qualification  to  succeed  as  allocatee  to  their 
        deceased father's landholding in accordance with existing agrarian laws, 
        rules, and regulations. 82 


             Apropos  is  the  ruling  of  the  Court  m  the  case  of  Hi-Lon 
        Manufacturing, Inc. v.  Commission on Audit:83 


                 xx x In Heirs of Clemente Ermac v.  Heirs of Vicente Ermac, the 
             Court clarified the foregoing principle, viz.: 

                       xx x While it is true that Section 32 of PD 1529 
                  provides  that  the  decree  of  registration  becomes 
                  incontrovertible  after  a  year,  it  does  not  altogether 
                  deprive  an  aggrieved  party of a remedy  in  law. The 
                  acceptability of the Torrens System would be impaired, if it is utilized to perpetuate fraud against the real owners.



Furthermore,  ownership  is  not  the  same  as  a 
                 certificate of title. Registering a piece of land under the Torrens System does not create or vest title, because registration is not a mode of acquiring ownership. A ce11ificate of title is merely an evidence of ownership or title over the particular property described therein. Its issuance in favor of a particular person does not foreclose the possibility that the real property may be co-owned with persons not named in the certificate, or that it may be held in trust for another person by the registered owner. 











                 In Lacbayan v.  Samay, Jr., the Court noted that what cannot be 
            collaterally attacked is the certificate of title, and not the title itself: 

                      x x x The ce11ificate referred to is that document 
                 issued by the Register of Deeds known as the TCT. In contrast, the title referred to by law means ownership which is, more often than not, represented by that document. x x x Title as a concept of ownership should not be confused with the certificate of title as evidence of such ownership although both are interchangeably used. 








                 In Mallillin,  Jr.  v.  Castillo, the Court defined collateral attack 
            on the title, as follows: 

                      x x x When is an action an attack on a title? It is 
                 when  the  object  of the  action  or  proceeding  is  to 
                 nullify  the  title,  and  thus  challenge  the  judgment 
                 pursuant to which the title was decreed. The attack is direct when the object of an action or proceeding is to annul or set aside such judgment, or enjoin its enforcement. On the other hand, the attack is indirect or collateral when, in an action to obtain a different relief, an attack on the judgment is nevertheless made 





                 as an incident thereof. 84 (Citations omitted) 


            The  issuance  of an  EP  in  favor  of petitioner  Merlita  does  not 
       constitute  a  collateral  attack on TCT No.  EP-5840  issued  in  favor  of 

       respondent Emelita. To recall, in the DAR Secretary's Order dated July 11, 1988, he confirmed the designation of respondent Emelita as the sole heir-cultivator of Deogracia's land and directed the issuance of a CLT in



her  name.85  Upon  petitioner  Merlita's  and  her  siblings'  motion  for 
       reconsideration/reinvestigation  on  the  ground  that  fraud  attended  the 

       Waiver  of Rights  in  favor  of respondent Emelita,  the  DAR Secretary 
       revoked his earlier Order and remanded the case to the Regional Director for further investigation.86 The DAR's scrutiny of the Waiver of Rights 

       was  necessary  to  validate  the  qualifications  of the  allocatee  and  to 

       resolve  the  issue  as  to  who  among  the  heirs  of the  deceased  CARP 
       beneficiary should be the rightful successor to the subject landholding in accordance with the provisions of MC 19, s. 1978. Corollary thereto, to expedite the reallocation of lands left by deceased beneficiaries, all DAR Regional Directors are authorized to confirm the selection of the sole owner-cultivator made by the surviving heirs or, in appropriate cases, to designate such sole owner-cultivator in accordance with existing rules 






       and regulations of the DAR. 87 


            As  borne  out  by  the  records,  during  the  pendency  of the  case 

       before  the  DAR,  EP No.  A-119356  and  TCT No.  EP-5840  had  been 
       issued in  respondent Emelita's name.88  Notwithstanding this,  the DAR 
       retains  its jurisdiction to  ultimately  resolve  petitioner Merlita and her 
       siblings'  motion  for  reconsideration/reinvestigation.  Consequently, 

       petitioner  Merlita  was  designated  as  the  sole  heir-cultivator  of the 
       subject land, and the issuance of an EP in her favor was ordered.8 9



It  bears  to  note  that  the  DAR  Secretary's  Order,  which  was 
        affirmed by the OP,  merely directed the  issuance of an EP in favor of 

        petitioner Merlita.90  The matter regarding the patent and the title issued 
        in the name of respondent Emelita during the pendency of the case was neither considered nor passed upon by the DAR. Therefore, there is no basis for the CA's conclusion that respondent Emelita's patent and title were canceled.91 Notably, the DAR Secretary's Order, if it eventually becomes final and executory, will serve as a basis for petitioner Merlita to file a petition for the cancellation of the patent and title issued in respondent Emelita's name.92 









             In Gabriel v.  Jamias ,93  the Court held that the issuance of an EP 

        does not by itself put the ownership of the agrarian reform beneficiary beyond attack and scrutiny. Emancipation patents may be canceled on 

        the ground of violations of agrarian laws, rules, and regulations.94 


        The factual findings of the DAR Secretary who, by reason of his official position, has 


        acquired  expertise  in  specific  matters 
        within his jurisdiction, deserve full respect and, without justifiable reason, ought not to be altered, modified, or reversed. 





             Notably, the CA set aside the Resolutions of the OP solely on the 
        ground that  it  was  the  DARAB  - not  the  DAR  Secretary - that  has 
        jurisdiction over the instant case.95 


             The Court finds, however, that a remand of the case to the CA for 
        determination of the· factual issues raised will only entail an unnecessary delay in the termination of the case considering that the records have been elevated to the Court in this Petition. 





             In  her Petition for  Review96  before the  CA,  respondent Emelita 
        assailed  the  Resolutions  of the  DAR Secretary  and the  OP as  to  the



matter of Merlita's qualification as  allocatee to the subject agricultural 
        landholding. 


             The  Court finds  no  cogent reason to  disturb the  findings  of the 

        DAR in  its  December  10,  1997 Order and April  14,  2008  Resolution 
        declaring petitioner Merlita as  the  legitimate  farmer-beneficiary of the 
        subject  agricultural  landholding.  To  reiterate,  the  selection  of CARP 
        beneficiaries  are  matters  involving  strictly  the  administrative 
        implementation of the  CARP,  which  is  exclusively  cognizable  by  the 

        DAR  Secretary  and  is  within  his  technical  expertise.  The  Court, 
        therefore,  defers to  his  findings  which were affirmed by the OP in its 
        Decision dated March 24, 2010 and its Resolution dated March 31, 2011. As the Court held in Garcia v. Santos Ventura Hocorma Foundation, Inc. :97 




                  We  cannot  simply  brush  aside  the  DAR :S·  pronouncements 
             regarding the status of the subject property as not exempt_ji-om CARP coverage considering that the DAR has unquestionable technical expertise on these matters. Factual findings of administrative agencies are generally accorded respect and even finality by this Court, if such findings are supported by substantial evidence, a situation that obtains in this case. The factual findings of the Secretary ofA grarian Reform who, by reason of his official position, has acquired expertise in specific matters within his jurisdiction, deserve fit!! respect and, without justifiable reason, ought not to be altered, modified or 








             reversed. 98 (Emphasis supplied.) 


             WHEREFORE,     the  Petition  for  Review  on  Certiorari  is 

        GRANTED. The assailed Decision dated November 29,  2016 and the 
        Resolution dated June 23, 2017 of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. SP No. 05935 are REVERSED and SET ASIDE. The Decision dated March 24, 2010 and the Resolution dated March 31, 2011 of the Office of the President in O.P. Case No. 08-E-190, as well as the Order dated December 10, 1997 and the Resolution dated April 14, 2008 of the Department of Agrarian Reform in Adm. Case No. 02-17-88-134, are 






        REINSTATED.



